Iran has downplayed the significance of
Friday's suspected Israeli air strike
raising hopes of an end to the
escalation between the two countries it
was seen as retaliation for last week's
massive but largely ineffective Iranian
missile and drone attack on Israel
Iranian officials say the strike hit a
military base near the Central City of
Isfahan describing it as a desperate
attempt for Israel to save phas PR
government protesters rallied in the
capital with the familiar
message thousands of people on the
streets of
Tran making their message to Israel
clear they held signs Enchanted death to
Israel ours after an alleged Israeli
strike on Iranian
soil these pictures posted on social
media show an undamaged military base in
Isfahan after the
attack the area is a major Center of
military
production with the country's most
important nuclear enrichment facility
located
nearby Iranian State media said there
was no damage following the
strikes basically in Iran life is based
on whatever happens normally there's
nothing whatsoever out of the ordinary
speaking at the G7 Summit in Italy on
Friday US Secretary of State Anthony
blinkin made America's position
clear what the G7 is focused on and
again it's reflected in our statement
and in our conversation is our work to
deescalate uh
tensions German foreign minister analena
bbok called for cool
heads as the G7 we have deci here today
to impose further sanctions and measures
on the Iranian
regime at the same time everything must
be done to prevent an escalation with
unforeseeable consequences for an entire
region Israel's war cabinet has been
debating its response to a largescale
Iranian attack last
weekend that came after Israel's
presumed strike of an Iranian diplomatic
compound but it's hoped Friday morning's
Maneuvers could be the last after Tran
indicated it has no plans for
retaliation now large explosions have
hit the base of an Iraqi Shia militia
south of Baghdad local medical sources
say at least one person was killed the
base belongs to a coalition of Iran
linked groups called the popular
mobilization forces the United States
has denied involvement in the attack
for more on this Let's cross over to
Ramat Gan in Israel near Tel Aviv where
DW's Shani ranes is standing by Hello
shanni nice to see you lots of questions
surrounding these explosions near
Baghdad they have been called an air
strike but the US is saying it wasn't us
what's the conversation in
Israel well not much honestly um what we
know is that there are some Anonymous
sources Israeli officials that are
quoted um saying it's also not Israel
but it's also typical we would expect
Israel to be denying that uh any action
in Iraq would be somewhat of an
Uncharted Territory nothing that Israel
would want to be admitting to do
especially not on such tense days um but
uh that is for now not much of a
discussions and what about the Drone
attack on esfahan in Iran which is
widely being attributed to Israel how is
Israel reacting to that incident
you know it was quite tense 24 hours
since uh the news of the attack uh were
came public and in Israel and we've seen
nothing coming from the government of
course on purpose uh Israel did not
claim any responsibility nor will it do
it but I think it's quite clear that the
fingers point back at Jerusalem um as a
retaliation there seem to be a lot of
content uh by the Iranian response we've
uh we've seen the Iranian foreign
minister for example complete completely
denying Israeli involvement in that
saying that would not have been making
any sense we've seen a lot of signs that
the regime in Iran is trying to push
away any framing of this as connected to
Israel which would might need to put
force on on the regime uh to retaliate
again so it seems like we're heading to
deescalation and we've seen a lot of sze
of relief coming of Israel following
that but also there's also with the back
of the Mind the fear in Israel that this
might also be some sort of a uh a trick
some sort of decoy a need for the
Iranians to kind of keep Israel sleepy
or off edge in order to maybe retaliate
when they find the time it this is
something we will have to deal with when
it comes to Iran and Israeli um
relations from now on it's interesting
what you say especially when we we use
the word deescalation from both sides
let me let me get your sense of this uh
what do you what do you make of how
Israel is managing the threat of
escalation with Iran and its proxy
so we know that the attack assuming it
really was Israel was sort of calming
things down showing that Israel has made
its uh response showing that you know an
attack from Irani soil on Israeli uh
land will not come you know without any
response and also this was a very
targeted strategically chosen um uh
facility that is very close to Iran's
nuclear facilities trying to Signal
whoever did that assumingly Israel
trying to sign if we wanted we could
have made it harsher we could have gone
all the way into attacking your nuclear
program but what we need to
fundamentally remember is that something
has been broken a red line was crossed
the relations between Israel and Iran
you know the shadow war that we've been
seeing in the last decades that has
broken and the two sides have stepped
into a a new territory of of of a spoken
uh very public um conflict and that
means we're not quite sure what's
heading now I think every you know both
sides are on their toes we of course see
the world uh very much uh attentive to
this uh conflict very careful of where
it's it's going to lead both the the
parties but the whole region um and for
now it seems like we're heading to
deescalation but everybody in the back
of their minds have this fear of uh
knowing that the old rules of the games
were broken and slowly new rules will be
uh written we will have to see how
Bloody and how um aggressive they might
end up being right only time will tell
twws sha ranes thank
you well I spoke earlier to Ali F NAD
he's a political scientist and director
of the center for Middle East in Global
Order here in Berlin and I asked him
what did he think was Israel behind this
attack in
Iran well I mean there is little
probability that um you know those
attacks were carried out by any other
state so there there's a higher
likelihood uh and also we have some
reports sing us officials uh that are
quite clear that Israel has been carry
carrying out the strike there has been
International worry that an Israeli
retaliation for last weekend's attack
would definitely escalate this conflict
and then the counter response coming
from Iran would make it even more of a
bigger crisis but that hasn't happened
how do you explain this this muted
response on both
sides well I think at this point in in
time no one has an interest um uh you
know to U provoke an allout War um this
is certainly true for the Iranian side
uh given also the nature of last
weekend's attack on Israel uh you know
the kinds of weapon systems that the
Iranians have used and also what has
happened and um you know today or last
night um is also in my view an
indication um that uh Israel did not uh
choose uh a fashion of attack that could
provoke Iran to uh further escalate and
uh what instead seems to have been the
case um I mean of course by now we don't
have any confirmation about the exact
nature of the attack and also the
targets and also the damages uh but it
seems that this was a demonstration of
power from the uh Israeli side uh a
signal sent to Iran that you know Israel
can cross Iranian uh defenses uh perhaps
at will and this has been a
demonstration of power from the Israeli
side uh signaling that uh if need be uh
you know Israel could easily uh Target
Iran in a force forceful way and
especially of course Iranian um military
infrastructure the Iranian media been
reporting that drones were shot down
near the Iranian city of Isfahan what
would make this city um a a
Target I mean um you know near esfahan
there a lot of uh military um you know
uh complexes but also nuclear facilities
uh but um talking of the Irani reaction
it's quite visible that the Iranians
have no uh you know appetite for
escalation uh they've been downplaying
uh this attack uh to a uh quite
ridiculous level uh in terms of saying
that you know only three drones were you
know uh shot and were intercepted by the
Iranian side and from uh all we can GA
so far this attack has been you know uh
much more than that but the Irani side
is is uh trying to uh you know keep it
low to downplay it if not to belittle it
uh that is also to not to have the
pressure to respond uh which is again in
contradiction to what the Iranian side
via the head of the irgc the Islam grai
guard had announced uh you know just
following uh the Iranian attack on
Israel as a new equation from the
Iranian side which would uh uh you know
which would suggest that any um uh
attack from the uh Israeli side on
Iranian assets would be met uh with a
with with a response from inside Iranian
territory so uh given the fact that this
new equation doesn't seem to hold uh
this signals that uh those have been you
know warnings rather than a change of uh
strategy and the Iranian side is still
very much worried that an allout War
could you know uh uh could evolve out of
those tensions and uh in such a scenario
this would also be very much
destabilizing for the regime in Iran do
you think the regime in Iran has is
realizing that maybe it's misread or
miscalculated uh the position of other
Gulf States and that maybe they were
counting on full support in a conflict
against Israel and that is obviously not
what they're getting
uh I don't think so that this was part
of the Iranian calculation that um you
know they're going to be supported by
the uh Gulf Arab Gulf States of um you
know against Israel but the position of
the Arab Gulf States is quite clear
they're very much interested uh you know
in bring about a
deescalation because stability for them
is vital uh politically but also
economically and so they fear any kind
of escalation in the region uh
especially involving Iran um they've
seen that Iran uh could be uh you know
very damaging to their nuclear uh sorry
to their economic viability to the kinds
of attacks that we've seen in the
Persian Gulf region against the UAE but
also against the main oil facility uh of
Saudi Arabia and September 2019 so uh
you know at least since then uh they're
extremely worried about destabilizing
activities of Iran uh and um given their
understanding of of relative reduction
of us support they've chosen the way to
seek accommodation with Iran but
currently of course they do whatever
they can uh toward
deescalation Aliah n director of the
center for Middle Easter Global Order we
appreciate your time on this Friday
evening thank
you thank you and more I want to bring
in now Sab ranbar Dei a historian who
specializes in modern Iran at St Andrews
University he joins us tonight from
edoro it's good to have you with us we
saw in the last 24 hours what appears to
been a restrained air strike by Israel
and a equally restrained response by
Iran is that a correct assessment I mean
what do you think we're witnessing
here yes I would think so I mean
obviously there's been no official
confirmation
by uh by Israel of the strike the
Americans have also not confirmed it the
White House or Anthony blink but uh the
Italian foreign minister of all people
who is hosting the G7 did confirm that
the Americans did did they tell them
that it's a Israeli strike and the
Israeli and the American Media are
confirming it as well so certainly it
has been I think a low key Israel
strike U and uh it has been to the level
that the Ians I think are considering
not to not to react and and just let it
simmer and and and sort of make this
round of Confrontation sort of uh calm
down and and move to the next stage and
and and why do you think that is because
the world this week has you know been
sitting on pins and needles wondering
what kind of Israeli response we were
going to see but also just as worried
about you know a counter response coming
from
tayron well I mean I think first of all
clearly there has been some negotiations
behind the scenes that probably some
countries have been mediating Qatar Oman
were traditional mediators in these
cases between Iran and the West probably
the United States have stepped in and
and and sort of the uh an arrangement
has been in in one way or the other
reach that there should be a mostly
symbolic strike I think Israelis have
chosen to strike around this spawn
because of course that's where some
important nuclear facilities are
particularly in aans and they seem to
have struck some radar stations either
connected to the military or some of the
defense systems connected to Natan so
they wanted to more than actually
inflict damage this time around give the
impression that they can strike um that
region u in the future and also Iran
when when launching those missiles the
previous week wanted to give the
impression or or sort of prove that it's
it is capable of hitting Israeli
territory so so this is I think what the
level of this is it's mostly an
exhibition of potential military press
rather than actually the intention to uh
to cause damage and we shouldn't forget
that espan of course is an important
artistic city as well so a strike on the
city would have caused a lot of Wrath
amongst Iranian public opinion
irrespective of their opinions towards
Islamic Republic
last night just just before this um
attack you know allegedly took place the
Iranian foreign minister gave an
interview in the United States and said
that if there were to be a any type of
retaliation any type of attack by Israel
the response by Iran would be at a
maximum level now he was asked to
explain that and he just repeated the
word maximum Lev
how do you interpret
that well we shouldn't forget that
Israelis are not actually admitting or
taking U ownership of what has happened
so clearly this gives some leeway for
the Iranians to um sort of state that
that pledge remains valid as long as the
strike is significant and Israelis are
actually um sort of acknowledging that
it was them um and then obviously Iran
wants to make the point that uh what we
saw last week was just a an opening
Salvo and they have better and and and
and and more precise missiles that they
can hit Israel with I mean we don't know
whether this is the case but probably
that's what Amir Abdullah Yan wanted to
to state however as they said the nature
of this Israeli strike makes it possible
also for to keep that threat uh on the
fire if you want but not actually
executed at this stage and Before I Let
You Go the fact that we had the Iranian
forign Minister you know using this this
Fierce rhetoric talking about a maximum
response and just hours later the actual
response
Byron was rather muted is this a case
that within the regime one hand doesn't
know what the other hand is is doing or
saying
well I would say that it's also a very
unprecedented situation for Iran I mean
it is it is a we've the conflict with
Israel is a is a very long-standing one
obviously it's has been at lower
intensity it has had this flare up with
the the Mascus attack and we shouldn't
forget it it's not over yet this this
chapter might be over with these strikes
but it's still simmering there in the
background so Iran is
really making policy as it goes along
this is a completely unprecedented
situation and uh and they are grappling
with the kind of uh reaction and the
rhetorical reaction has been very strong
as we've seen from Iran all along but
again I think that the nature of the
Israeli
strike um now that it has actually
happened could actually um persuade Iran
to step back and uh and avoid obviously
this this issue from from overshadowing
what's going on in Gaza of course they
they portray themselves as supporters of
the Palestinian call so they won't won't
want that to happen Okay sa ranar Demi
from St Andrews University we appreciate
you taking the time to talk with us on
this Friday night thank
you my pleasure thank you